# C

sample main program
```C
int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {

  exit(0)
}
```


# 12 - read, write, open I/O

Compile program: 
```Bash
 cc program.c -o output.out
```
To open files we need this library:
```C
#include <fcntl.h>
```



file discriptor - when we open file, if it returns a positive number,
this number is the "file descriptor id". We can use it to call other programs.

By default there are 3 opened I/O lines. 
```
 0 - standart input
 1 - standart output
 2 - standart error output
```
if returned number is negative => there is error in the file descriptor operation 

### Open
```C
int open(const char *filename, int oflag);
 // or
int open(const char *filename, int oflag, mode_t mode);
```
Opens file
- file name - name of file to open
- flags:
    - O_RDONLY - read only
    - O_WRONLY - write only
    - O_RDWR   - read and write
    - O_CREAT  - create file
    - O_EXCL   - ( used with ```O_CREAT``` ) if file is created don't create it again (exclude file). 
    - O_TRUNC  - ( used with ```O_WRONLY``` or ```O_RDWR```) (truncated to 0) delete all information on file
    - O_APPEND - ( used with ```O_WRONLY``` or ```O_RDWR```) start on the end of file to write information
- mode - when using O_CREAT, we need to give permissions for the file. We need to start with **0** and then continue with 3 numbers, just like in bash. The zero is, because of rounting or something. ```0744``` read,write,execute - owner, read,execute - group and others 

#### Common problems from past test:
- using ``` O_RDONLY ``` and ``` O_WRONLY ``` in the same ```open()```
- only using ``` O_RDWR ``` when one of the operation is not needed 

#### return code
Returns file descriptor that is used when ```read()``` or ```write()``` is called. Don't forget to close the file at the end of program or when is not needed

### Read
```C
ssize_t read(int fd, void *buf, size_t nbytes);
```
Reads file
- fd - file descriptor - from which file to read
- buf - give a char buffer to save to it
- nbytes - how many bytes to read from the buffer

#### return code
it returns the size of red buffer. If we pass 10 bytes to be red, but there are only 6, it will return 6.
```C
char buff[25];
int countOfRedBytes = read(0, buff, 25);
```
if file ended, countOfRedBytes will be zero
if error, returns -1

#### if you see at the example
we can use 0,1,2 in reading or writing to standart I/O line. This is will be on the test!

### Write
```C
ssize_t write(int fd, void *buf, size_t nbytes);
```
writes to file
- fd - file descriptor - from which file to read
- buf - give a char buffer to save to it
- nbytes - how many bytes to read from the buffer

### lseek ?


### close
```C
int close(int fd);
```
Closes file line. This is needed to return at end of file.

### dup, dup2
duplicates a pipeline
```C
int dup(int oldfd)
```
duplicates a file descriptor to the first empty place
```C
int dup2(int oldfd, int newfd)
```
duplicates a file descriptor to specific

exmaples from chatgpt:
```C
int fd = open("file.txt", O_RDONLY);
int fd_copy = dup(fd);
```

```C
int fd = open("file.txt", O_RDONLY);
dup2(fd, 1); // Redirects stdout (fd 1) to "file.txt"
```


# 14 - Processes, fork, wait...

### basic program
First ever process is **init** or **systemd** (system deamon). This process makes forks (clones or copies) of itself that execute other code. The data, stack and code is copied, the programs continue after the fork() command. 

### which is which
We usually make ```if(fork())``` check. if return 0 (a.k.a false) it is a child. if it returns bigger number, it is a parent and the number is the child PID (process id).
- parent - a process
- child - clone of the process


### when the parent end executon
if parent is done, it dies or stops, then the child is transfered to the **init** process.


### needed libraries
```
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>
```

### fork
```C
pid_t fork(void);
```
#### return codes
- -1  - error
- 0   - currently in child
- pid - currently in parent, this is the code of the child


#### example for checking
```C
int pid = fork();
if(pid == -1) {
perror("Couldn't fork!");
exit(-1);
}
else if(pid > 0) {
//this is the only parent part
printf("Hello from the parent");
}
else {
//this is the only child part
printf("Hello from the child");
}
```

### getpid(); getppid();
```C
pid_t getpid(void);
pid_t getppid(void);
```
- getpid() - returns pid, of the process that calls it
- getppid() - returns pid of the parent for the process calling it.

Most often a child process has PID = (Parent PID + 1) 

### wait();
```C
pid_t wait(int * status);
```

This forces the parent to wait for one child process to finish. Whatever status code the child returns it will be saved at **status**

example:
```C
int status;
wait(&status); // this needs AND before status because we give it pointer
printf("status is %d", status);
```

Alternatively
##### waitpid
```C
pid_t waitpid(pid_t pid, int * status, int options);
```
this waits for specific process
- pid - which process to wait for
- status - same as above
- options - some options ( if interested check online )


#### more
the two functions return the pid of the finished child


### exec
This is more *interensting* program. **Commond error are here so read carefully** 

Normally when we call fork the two programs continue as there is.
When we call *one of the many* exec functions we force the process to change everything. It basically forgets all the code and starts executing **new** process.


#### To begin with
- when there is p ( like in execv**p** ) this means path
- when there is v ( like in exec**v**p ) this means vector
- when there is l ( like in exec**l** ) this means list

#### Two types of exec
```C
char * args1[] = {"ls", "-l", "/home", NULL};
execv("/bin/ls", args1);

execl("/bin/ls", "ls", "-l", "/home", 0);
```
Here the difference is that:
- execv - calls a vector with all the arguments
  - the ```args[]``` vector needs to be pointer and to end with **NULL** to indicate end of vector
- execl - calls all the the arguments until 0 is reaches

we need to specify where the command is located. In the example ``` /bin/ls ``` is the location.

After that we write down't every argument. Ofcourse ```ls``` may not be considered argument, but why then we call it with ```$0``` in *bash* ( just an idea to help explain it, idk why we call it).

#### path
```C
execvp("ls", args1);
execlp("ls", "ls", "-l", "/home", 0);
```
if we know our command is global and is in path variable ( try ```echo $PATH``` in bash). This is simpler way to call it.



#### Common errors
```c
 execvp("ls", args);
 printf("This is not going to be printed!"); // This is was common error in last year test
```
When we do the tracing exercise **DON'T** conitnue the code after **exec** is called.



# For the test

- ```printf``` is used for int display
- ```write(1,...)``` is used for printing string
example:
```C
int a = 19;
printf("This number is %d", a); // allowed

write(1, "Hello world", 11); // allowed

printf("Hello world"); // not allowed!!!
```
This is because they want to test our ```write``` command skills I guess


If I'm not mistaken we don't have to write the libraries when we write them with pen on the paper. **NOT 100% sure tho.**


Common problems from *week 12*:
- using O_RDONLY and O_WRONLY in the same open() 
- only using O_RDWR when one of the operation is not needed



### other tools
```c
int myInt;
scanf("%d",&myInt);
```

```c
char myChar;
read(0,&myChar,1);
write(1,&myChar,1);
```